What's your personal opinion of Amtrak? My
personal opinion of Amtrak is that it started off
on the wrong foot. Why? It started off with its own
organization to rethink railroad passenger
service. Well, that's not necessarily bad, but
they hired the occupants from the bus line and the
airlines to try to make a passenger train over and
stay by an airline. That doesn't work. They really
hired very few railroad passenger people when
Amtrak was moved. they have subsequently hired a
fair number of people from the railroads. And I
think that has improved both the relationship
between Amtrak and the railroads, because now
Amtrak as a corporation has a better
understanding of the problems involving those
trains. And it's more willing to work with the
railroads to solve problems, rather than in the
early 70s use an adversarial position. The
railroads versus Amtrak, Amtrak versus the
railroads, nothing really got accomplished.
How did Amtrak have its impact on the services
offered? Did Amtrak have the funds to reinstate
most of the services that had been taken out just
prior to its emergence? No, Amtrak, during its
early days, never had much funding. And it lived
from year to year. It could never make any
long-range plans. It also... Excuse me. But
also... Amtrak
was originally supposed to be a profit-making
corporation. Amtrak was established by law as a
profit-making organization. But it's not making
profit. It has never made profit, and it depends on
public funds for its survival. In recent years, it
has had enough funding where it can make advanced
plans. It has completely re-equipped its fleet in
the last two or three years. The equipment that it
inherited from the railroads were anywhere from,
dated from 1935 through 1960 vintage. Did Amtrak
have a problem in that it acquired equipment from
various lines and it wasn't standardized? That's
right. Each railroad had its own design for cars.
They were all worked together, run together, but
they all had the same general specifications. But
the railroads running across Dakotas and Montana
had a car that were heavily insulated because of
the cold pipes and the cold weather. The railroads
running between New York and Florida had a
different type of car. They weren't so heavily
insulated. But each railroad knew its equipment
and knew where it should run. And they were pretty
much kept to these roofs. Well, when Amtrak took
over, it mixed all the equipment up. They would
take the Florida cars and send them up to the
Washington, Montana area. And these people up
there had never seen those cars before. And they
didn't know what to do to fix them when they went
back. And they took the Montana and Dakota cars and
shipped them down to Florida. People there had the
same problem. Because each other's, they had to do
different equipment, electrical equipment, air
conditioning equipment. And then the first
winter in Amtrak, one of all those cars that were
running across Dakota and Montana were freezing
up every trip. Well, it turns out they were all the
Florida cars. They were using the wrong equipment
in the wrong spot. And it was just things like that
when Amtrak was new that were really dumb
mistakes. How did the government handle these
problems? Did the government realize that Amtrak
wasn't making as much money as it was supposed to
make? Yes. In fact, there were several attempts
along the way to kill Amtrak. Really?
But there was always enough senators and
congressmen who wanted to see the train run
through their cities that kept Amtrak alive. And
that's another problem with Amtrak. It started
off with a core system. Before it could improve its
core system, the senator of this particular
state, or the congressman from this time, insist
on having a train through his town. He was on the
House Transportation Committee. He got his train
through his town. And that train would just lose
bunches and bunches of money, but it went from
nowhere to nowhere. They restricted political
trains, and Amtrak was saddled with many of them.
There was no rational need for the trains, except
it was a political expediency to keep Amtrak
alive. What were some of the benefits that came
from the Amtrak takeover? Well, the one benefit
from Amtrak takeover, we did have a nationwide
system, and you can make a reservation anywhere in
the country fairly quickly. The railroads had the
same type of reservation, but sometimes it took
days and days to get that reservation confirmed
because they had to wire right from one railroad to
another. Amtrak would What was the public
attitude
towards
Amtrak? At first the public was very pleased with
Amtrak, that they were going to save the Passion
Terrain, restore it to its former glory, and
increase all sorts of services. Although the
public became very disillusioned.
There were a lot of hot cars, shipping these cars
around the country, people didn't know how to fix
them. I would see cars come out of New Orleans on the
Sunset Limit and come to Houston. The ASP
mechanics, Southern City mechanics, used to try
to fix the car. Well, it was not a car they were
familiar with, and they would sometimes hold that
train for an extra 30 minutes just trying to fix the
air conditioning on one sleeping car. And
finally, they'd equip their hands and say, I can
fix it. And so the train would go, and the next
station would try to fix it, and that type of thing.
But once Amtrak standardized on its equipment and
hired its own mechanical forces, a lot of those
problems went away. About what time did the
problems start going away? Well, in the mid, oh,
about 1976 or 7, they started getting these, what
they called amp-lead equipment, and more recent.
And these are... body shell, very similar to the
Metroliner trains, which the Pennsylvania
Railroad developed
in the 1960s. And they had what they call AM coaches
and AM dinettes and AM lounge cars. They did not
have any sticky cars in this configuration. These
were all what we call head-in power. When the
railroad passenger cars all had, were
self-contained, they had a battery. which
powered the car when it was down in the scale. They
had generators in these cars which generated
electricity and the car would move it. Sometimes
they had steam air conditioning based on a steam
boiler in the diesel engine. And in the winter, all
the trains were heated by steam. Again, the steam
boiler in the diesel locomotives, or in the early
days, the steam locomotives. Well, Amtrak has
converted the heating power, which says that
there is a generator on the diesel. And this
generator produces all the electricity for the
train. The cars are no longer self-contained.
They don't have any batteries, except for
emergency lighting. They don't have to generate
their own power at all. So as long as everything is
working fine on the head end, or there's no
problems with the wiring between cars, it works
very well. More recently, Amtrak has taken this
same philosophy and gone one step further with
their superliner equipment. The superliners are
They have
both sleeping cars, coaches, and dining cars, and
lounge cars. When did these cars start? These came
in about 1980. Those are very recent. Very recent.
Yes. Well, let's see. What's the current public
attitude towards rail travel with these
improvements? I think it's looking at, you know,
there's a lot of people who enjoy the train rides.
Let me step back. In the early 1970s, when
Anchorage was first organized, they had what they
called advisory councils in different cities in
the country. And I was participating in the
advisory council in Houston. And this is where I
was having a lot of problems. We would just
generally talk about things that could do or
should be doing could do down the road. I got very
discouraged early on because some of the official
that come out of Chicago for the advisory. Don't
not to worry. All right. We have a problem. Only 3%
of the population has ridden our train. We have 97%
of the public out there still to go. Well, that's
not true, because you don't have 97% of the public
to draw from. You have maybe at the most 10% of the
public to draw from. The other 90% don't want to
spend the time traveling by train. They want to get
there in three hours by air, or they want to drive,
or whatever. So you really, passenger service is a
very small market sector that you could possibly
draw from. And then things got progressively
worse. Equipment got more decrepit. Amtrak could
not maintain it. They were told to make money on
dining car service, which the railroad never had
been able to do, and railroad drew dining cars sort
of as a lost leader, like in a store where they had to
price something at low cost to attract patronage.
In about 1980, I would say about the lowest point
ever, They had all this new soup line equipment,
all the fancy new ranges and what have you,
electric ranges. And all they were serving was
McDonald's type food, but not up to McDonald's
standards. And they took the stewards off the
dining car and the waiters. They had two waiters
for a full length dining car. And people would come
in to be served, say a family of four. And one of them
would get served, and five minutes later somebody
else would get served. And it just was not, it was
disorganized. And I remember one trip I took in
Chicago to Los Angeles, and I was going to continue
riding on Amtrak when I got to Los Angeles. I was so
fed up with the service, the food, the quality of
the food and everything. I was like, I found my
first pay phone in Los Angeles, a passenger
terminal, call an airline, make a new
reservation. Competing industries are taking
away the customers. But since Graham Clayton, who
was formerly president of Southern Railway and
president of Amtrak, a lot has happened. A lot has
changed. He... Those railroads, he's been in the
railroads industry his entire life.
These so-called marketing people or analytical
people in Washington who don't know anything
about railroads
but try to market it. He gave them short shrift, and
they really just told them, shape up or ship out.
He's put quality first. originally quality food
back in the dining cars. It does have restrictions
on how much money you can spend and lose, but things
are really looking up. All the onboard people now
are re-employed by Amtrak. The railroads provide
the conductors and breakmen and engineers on most
of the routes.
But the big sleeping car attendants, the waiters,
and so forth are all Amtrak employees. If the
attitude is looking up, are there any plans to
expand the services offered, put more lines out?
Amtrak is out looking at the possibility of new
routes, but their funding is limited and they're
still trying to improve the service they have. For
example, the train between New Orleans through
Houston to Los Angeles only runs three times a
week. Years ago, they should have put that daily,
but it had not been able to find it. Now, for the
Louisiana World's Fair, they are putting on a
special train from Mobile to New Orleans, which
they hope to try to take from this. The states are
also helping support that. That's this summer.
This summer, that's correct. What about the
possibility of the bullet train from Houston to
Dallas? That's an interesting concept. I'm
interested in seeing if they can finance it. How do
you feel about that? Do you think it has any future?
I think it has a future. I think that railroad
tracks in eastern Dallas could be a viable...
Yeah, if you have sufficient tight... sufficient
train. Recently, Amtrak looked at the
possibility of rerouting to Sunset, Memphis,
which is the... up to Dallas, then out to El Paso.
That way. Well, as long as there's only...
Tri-weekly service, you're not going to track
people right. And even if they put that train on
daily, it still wouldn't do it because you could
only go one direction and make a round trip. You
need to have at least twice a day service on a
corridor type route so that people can go up in the
morning, do their business, and the other city can
return home if you want to try to save the business
crowd. In the 1950s
and early 60s, when I used to travel to Dallas on
vacation by train, I could go up in the morning and
do whatever I wanted to do and come back home that
evening. And people in Dallas used to do the same
thing. But when we'd be down to only one train a day,
well, I'd cut out over half of your passenger. That
would add a cost of a motel room for every night onto
the price per ticket. Well, with all the airline
service, Yeah, I mean, it was hard to compete with
the Southwest $30 and $40 fares. Well, was the
government this past year threatening to cut
funding again? Uh, I have... I'm not aware of that.
Amtrak seems to try to secure its return funding,
but they are being encouraged to try to cover more
of the costs out of the fare box. And they are doing
better. What did Amtrak have as an impact on, say,
the private
car owners? Let me stop that for a second. Thanks.
OK. As I mentioned earlier, in the 20s, before,
there were a lot of affluent people handling their
own private railroad cars. And more recently, a
different group, some of them very affluent, some
of them just common workers, started buying
railroad cars that were owned and operated. And,
well, while Amtrak was very negative about
handling these private cars, but now Amtrak
realizes that it really doesn't cost them
anything to pull these cars. Why were they
negative about pulling the cars? Really, they
weren't set up to handle them. I would say the
people who ran Amtrak at that time were not very
loyal to them. They didn't realize that they would
make a lot of money. at a relatively lower expense
than that. So the private car owner, when he puts
his car up to 20, pays for 20 fares, whether it's in
one person or 20 people in the car. Anybody over 20
in the car, there are extra fares of Amtrak. Gets a
minimum of 20 fares up to how it remains on the car.
But Amtrak now realizes that What were some of the
demands? Well, they wanted work done on their
equipment. Some of the cars were not in too good
shape. There was a whole list of it. people,
agitations on both sides. And that resulted in an
organization formed known as the American
Association of Private Car Owners. And this
association had this sort of a buffer between
private car owners. And it resolved a lot of
differences and problems. Many of the problems
that were there 10 years ago have been resolved by
mutual cooperation and dualization. Has your
club experienced any of these problems in trying
to pull its private cars on anti-trainers? Yes,
we've experienced two problems. One of them, we
had a problem with the southern city railroad in
that they started switching the car around. That
problem has been resolved. through our
satisfaction, so we have no problem with the
impact. The main problem with the impact is that
it's
difficult to get them to go to fair. It may take you
months to get a fair quotation back. And once they
give you a fair quotation, they want you to do it
immediately. So that's one of
the
things. hopefully work out with Amtrak. Do you
think Amtrak was doing that intentionally to
discourage you from? No, I don't think so. I think
that the main reason Amtrak thought it was
involved in animal expeditions was because they
realized that the playground chain was a real
problem. Well, let's see. What about the
possibility of mass transit in Houston being
solved, the problem of mass transit being solved
by rail? Houston is a very spread out
city. And to make rail viable, it has to be a large
quantity of people, with a mass of people, to do one
of those buses, and one of them's nice. I
personally voted against metro's rail system.
Why did you do that? Because I thought it was too
much for two little systems. There are
a lot of
cities that are looking at all kinds of heavy rail,
such as what Houston is, or a massive transit
system such as New York has. What used to be called
streetcars is now called light rail. A light rail
system in Houston might work out quite well.
There's a lot of cities that built new light rail
systems recently. San Diego has one that's
operationally old. Well,
when
you're looking back
is that rail service was declining in the 60s. Was
there any alternative to Amtrak to the government
jumping in? Do you think it was right for the
government to jump in and try to save it? That's a
philosophical question, and it's hard to answer.
Yes, I think the rail service does do it.
I am not sure. The
old folks can travel.
Well, that's
not really true. Most towns are trying to organize
it. They have adequate bus service so that if they
lost the passenger train, yes, it might be able to
use a handful of people, but it's not that. All
right, good. All in the rows.
.
. . . .
Has
there been any
growth in the popularity of the restoration of old
racing roads? Because you're saying several
different classes of people have been involved in
cars. Yes. Is that a trend? There are probably more
people in cars running in the United States than
there were in the United States. Are they
basically rare roads or practically? Yes,
basically true. There are a number of rare roads. .
. . . . .
. . .
. . . . We got done
in Galveston
recently. We had a steam locomotive going to St.
Mary's.
And
they know how their space is not going to be out of
the water. Last year, . So that's another . This
year, we will also have Thank
you.
Thank
you. This
train was restored . That's correct. When it got
back to Portland .
So
really, There
was a time when the railroads didn't want to deal
with that. The way they didn't want to deal with
that is now they realize there's more and more
people involved. There are a lot of problems
associated with it. I
understand that you're a local organization, and
it's tools for people. Many people nowadays,
especially young children, couldn't afford road
management. We are looking at a railway industry
as well. I
don't know. Thank
you for coming.